---
title: Choosing a foundation for a React component library
description: What is the best way moving forward with my own design system?
tags:
  - design-systems
---

When I created [my own design system](https://design-system.maier.tech/), I
chose [Theme UI](https://theme-ui.com/) for styling. Back then Theme UI was on
track to become the go to styling solution for
[Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/) websites. But then, for a number of reasons
[discussed here](https://github.com/system-ui/theme-ui/discussions/1354),
contributions to the
[Theme UI repository](https://github.com/system-ui/theme-ui) leveled off. Theme
UI is still maintained, but activity on the repository is much less than it used
to be and the team has a hard time getting v1.0 out of the door.

This is a common problem with open source projects. They tend to depend on a few
active contributors. On the other hand, consumers of open source projects, like
me, are often unable to contribute due to time or skill contraints. This makes
it very challenging to replace key contributors when they drop out.

I am now looking for alternatives to Theme UI for the next iteration on my
design system. This article looks at three different styling solutions. The goal
was not to create a comprehensive review of styling solutions for a React
component library, but to help me choose among styling solutions that I had on
my radar.

## Why did I choose Theme UI initially?

It all started with [Styled Components](https://styled-components.com/), which
was my first experience with CSS-in-JS. Two features stood out to me: scoped CSS
and theming. Then I came across [Styled System](https://styled-system.com/) by
[Brent Jackson](https://jxnblk.com/), which is a layer on top of Styled
Components that adds three more features: design tokens (e.g. space scales),
themes that use those design tokens, and an easy to grasp mobile-first syntax
for styling. This makes Styled System a powerful framework for creating design
systems in code.

Since Styled System is not a component library, I reached for
[Rebass](https://rebassjs.org/), a layer on top of Styled System by the same
author. Rebass introduces 8 atomic components that can be used to build complex
components. Atomic components are a powerful design patternfor design systems.
They are like Lego bricks you can use to compose pretty much anything you can
think of.

[Theme UI](https://theme-ui.com/) is Rebass's successor and the latest iteration
on the concepts that Styled System and Rebass introdcued. It felt like a natural
choice for my design system, since it added a component library, syntax
improvements and integration with [MDX](https://mdxjs.com/). The latter was
important for MDX powered Gatsby sites. The downside of Theme UI is that it is
opinionated about styling. The cost of switching over to another styling
solution is expensive. But Theme UI empowered me to be very productive and
create themable websites with consitent spacing and font sizes in no time.

## Chakra UI

[Chakra UI](https://chakra-ui.com/) is built on Styled System. This underlines
Styled System's compelling proposition to make it easy to create design systems
in code. Unfortunately, the
[Styled System repository](https://github.com/styled-system/styled-system) faced
the same fate as Theme UI: activity and contributions leveled off. Chakra UI was
proactive about a key dependecy not being maintained any more and absorbed
Styled System into their codebase as
[@chakra-ui/styled-system](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/tree/main/packages/styled-system).

A very strong argument in favor of choosing Chakra UI as a replacement for Theme
UI is that both APIs are very similar, because they share the Styled System
foundation. Chakra UI's compelling component library is a big bonus.

But this is the key question: is Chakra UI's community more robust than Theme
UI's? It is definitively in in much better shape, but
[Chakra UI's contributors graph](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/graphs/contributors)
reveals a strong dependecy on the original creator
[Segun Adebayo](https://twitter.com/thesegunadebayo). If he left the project,
Chakra UI could face the same fate as Theme UI.

## Radix and Stitches

[Modulz](https://www.modulz.app/) is a startup with a web app that helps you
create design systems visually and delivers production ready code. One
foundational technology for this web app is
[Radix Primitives](https://radix-ui.com/), a library of unstyled React
components. You can bring your own styling solution to style these components.
This by itself is a very compelling value proposition. Most existing React
component libraries mandate a specific styling technology, e.g. you have to use
Styled Components or you have to use Emotion or you have to use classnames.

The recommended styling solution for Radix Primitives is
[Stitches](https://stitches.dev/), another foundational technology for the
Modulz app. You can think of Stitches as a rewrite of Styled System. The same
concepts, a different syntax, and no actual dependecy on Styled System.

Radix Primitives and Stitches are open source and maintained mostly by Modulz
employees.
[Modulz has secured VC funding in 2020](https://www.modulz.app/blog/modulz-raises-4-million-funding),
which should give them enough runway to get Radix Primitives and Stitches off
the ground.

## Tailwind CSS

I don't understand why [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) is so
polarizing. Some developers are very vocal about it and reject the idea of using
utility classes for styling. Controversy aside, the company behind Tailwind CSS,
Tailwind Labs, was bootstrapped by [Adam Wathan](https://adamwathan.me/) from
zero employees to four employees without any VC money. You probably could not
make a safer choice for a styling solution. There is no dependency on community
contributors and no risk that of VC money not returning profits fast enough.

There is so much hotness and hype around Tailwind CSS. Almost too much. Let's
start with some downsides:

- Tailwind CSS does not come with any components. Because it's components are
  the commercial spin-off [Tailwind UI](https://tailwindui.com/). And none of
  these components can be packaged and distributed in a design system.
- [Optimizing for production](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/optimizing-for-production)
  is a hassle in Tailwind and involves stripping utility classes based on
  regular expressions. For a component library
  [this gets messy and involved](https://gist.github.com/somebody32/48277662e55dd450d542724bc989c62d).

But Tailwind CSS also makes a case for styling being just a very thin and
lightweight layer that can be swapped for some other styling technology. Their
[Headless UI](https://headlessui.dev/) suggests that components should probably
be put in a library without styling and then be styled in the site only.
Headless UI is very early and I am not sure if I want to rely on it already.

React component libraries that use Tailwind CSS:

- https://nature-ui.com/ ([GitHub](https://github.com/nature-ui/nature-ui)):
  Built with Emotion and Tailwind CSS.

How to build a React component library with Tailwind CSS:

- https://tilomitra.com/building-react-components-using-tailwind/

## Which solution did I choose?

## More unstyled components

- https://reakit.io/
