---
title: Gatsby themes kitchen sink
description: A collection of issues around Gatsby themes.
tags:
  - gatsby
---

## Authoring Themes

When authoring a theme, we need to ensure that it is self-contained and does not
interfere with other themes or the actual Gatsby site. In this section I
collected approaches I came across to achieve this.

### Separate logic from layout

In this approach you separate theme logic from theme layout. For example,
[`gatsby-theme-blog-core`](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/themes/tree/master/packages/gatsby-theme-blog-core)
contains theme logic with unstyled pages that are meant to be shadowed.
[`gatsby-theme-blog`](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/themes/tree/master/packages/gatsby-theme-blog)
shadows all pages and adds layouts. Adding layouts is very opinionated and this
architecture

### Separate context

Some libraries such as [Theme UI](https://theme-ui.com/home) or
[Emotion](https://emotion.sh/docs/introduction) work with a shared context
(called provider) that is normally established in `wrapRootElement`. For
example, Theme UI uses a `ThemeProvider`. If both the site and a theme configure
a `ThemeProvider` with their own design tokens via `wrapRootElement`, you end up
with a conflict. If you really need two different sets of design tokens, one in
the theme and another one in the rest of the site, you can create a separate
context in your theme and use that context in all your components. Check out
[this example](https://github.com/ChristopherBiscardi/advanced-gatsby-themes-workshop-code/tree/06-mdx-blog-posts).

If your plan is to use only one set of design tokens on your entire website,
then can work with a plugin. For example,
[`gatsby-plugin-theme-ui`](https://theme-ui.com/packages/gatsby-plugin/)
establishes the context for you. You can use this plugin in your theme and in
your site and based on what was discussed before, the plugin config of the site
will be used.

### Explicit and implicit dependencies

You can think of the GraphQL graph that Gatsby creates as one big global graph.
Every plugin manipulates the same global graph. This is a blessing and a curse.
It's a blessing beacause you can create very powerful queries across different
data sources. It's a curse because because a global graph can lead to undesired
side effects when composing themes.

Let's assume we have two themes: `gatsby-theme-blog` to manage posts and
`gatsby-theme-profiles` to manage author profiles. In order to link to author
profiles from a post, `gatsby-theme-blog` needs to query nodes in the global
graph that are managed by `gatsby-theme-profiles`.

You can make `gatsby-theme-profiles` a parent theme and explicit dependency in
`gatsby-theme-blog`. Then `gatsby-theme-blog` controls `gatsby-theme-profiles`
in the sense that it sets its options. But it does not control the graph.
Another theme could use `gatsby-theme-profiles` and add more profiles. This is
the problem with Gatsby's graph, every plugins can mess with it.

But what can you do if you want to share the same profile collection across
multiple themes? Each theme could use `gatsby-theme-profiles` as parent theme.
If theme options for `gatsby-theme-profiles` are identical, there should be no
issues with duplicate pages being generated. But you might run into issues when
different themes use different versions of `gatsby-theme-profiles`. You could
decide against making `gatsby-theme-profiles` a dependency in any theme using it
and would end up creating an implicit dependency because your theme still
queries nodes that it did not create. Alterantively, you could let your theme
only query data it controls and make a hook availalbe in `gatsby-theme-profiles`
that other themes can import and use to query and filter all profiles. This
seems a cleaner solution, because the depedency is explicit, but there are no
queries to any data that your theme does not control.

**It looks like one lesson learned is that it is a bad idea if a theme queries
nodes that it did not create.**

You should examine your theme if you make the implicit assumption that it is
used only once. For example, if you configure above mentioned
`gatsby-theme-blog` twice with different locations from which to create posts
and profiles, they would still end up in one global posts collection and one
global profiels collection. Your theme should add options to allow being
confiugred multiple times in a meaningful way.

**A theme cannot be configured more than once in a site, unless you add theme
options to make using it more than once meaningful.**

## Recommendations

- [Reflex](https://reflexjs.org/) is a collection og packages and Gatsby themes.
  Awesome material to learn from.
- [Doctocat](https://github.com/primer/doctocat) is backed by GitHub and a
  pretty polished theme that is suitable to document component libraries.
- Book: https://github.com/SaraVieira/gatsby-starter-book
- Still need to vet [Catalyst](https://www.gatsbycatalyst.com/) to see if its
  good quality.
- [gatsby-theme-courses](https://github.com/hangindev/gatsby-theme-courses):
  check if this can be used as basis for a course platform.

## Webpack and Shadowing

It is important to mention that Gatsby themes are build on webpack and the
component shadowing mechanism is follows webpack's way of resolving modules.
This means that a core functionality of Gatsby is married to Webpack and will
make it difficult long term to move away from Webpack.

## Static files

In dev static files from a theme are not copied to `public`, see
https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/14003. Files from themes are copied
during build. If there are conflicting files, processing sequence matters. Site
static files always win.

See https://github.com/maiertech/gatsby-themes/issues/125.
